AU Parodi, Ramiro
TI ALTHUSSER'S KEYS TO READ ALVARO GARCIA LINERA'S MARXISM
SO ASTROLABIO-NUEVA EPOCA
AB Where can we find Marxism today? Answering this question raises a   problem that Jacques Derrida assumed when he said: "there is more than   one of them, there must be more than one of them (them meaning Marx's   ghosts)" Then, which is the Marx that Althusser invites us to read and   to translate into political action? The aim of this text is to trace the   guidelines of the Marx that Althusser shapes (through the concepts of   political practice and theoretical practice) in Alvaro Garcia Linera's   thought.   These althusserian concepts allow us to propose Alvaro Garcia Linera as   the "heir" (Derrida, 1995) of Marxist philosophy and as a theorist of   revolution today. His militant condition and his position as Bolivia's   vice-president determine his theoretical production because he does not   develop this production in the middle of nothingness but writes in a   very particular political situation. Thus, we can understand that Garcia   Linera addresses in his theoretical practice something that is   objectively present in the historical process during which, and about   which, he is writing: the liberating power of the indigenous people.   We are going to focus on Linera's re-reading of the Communist Manifesto   though these althusserian concepts in order to get a deeper scope of a   thought that invokes Marx at the same time that it highlights the   necessity of thinking within the political situation. By doing this, we   are not aiming to make conclusions about its truthfulness or falsehood;   instead, we are trying to produce a political analysis of his discourse   in order to research the contradictions which emerge when Marx is read   through the variants that the political situation proposes and, by doing   this, we are also trying to deepen the studies in communication and   politics.   We will also go through interviews, conferences and other texts written   by the vice president of Bolivia to locate the most recent developements   of his thoughts. Our aim is to start tracing a series of interlocutors   with which Garcia Linera contends and argues, in order to set the basis   of a research process that will deepen the analysis of his works.
