AU Kurhinen, Pavel
TI HUMAN DIGNITY, ETHICAL SOCIALISM AND SOVIET ETHICS
SO VESTNIK TOMSKOGO GOSUDARSTVENNOGO
AB The purpose of this article is to outline those essential distinctions   of ethical socialism from a radical or left socialism, namely, not in   the political plane, but in respect of development of "ethical"   doctrines. Why the moral and legal aspect in philosophy of ethical   socialism and as Kant's categorical imperative can enrich dialectic   materialism, and also show why it is better to change social reality   peacefully, instead of world revolutions, hat is so important.   Proceeding from Cohen, Communism as telos (goal) of history unfolds   through denying the existence of the rule of law and upholds the denial   here of the possibility of revolution. Thus dialectical thinking seems   to exclude the possibility of non-radical change through transformative   steps of laws, and calls instead for a class polarization and structural   violence, regardless of the empirical conditions where it is located.   The very "unjustified" violence is contrary to moral principles and the   categorical imperative. The categorical imperative, which dominates in   thoughts of ethical socialists, is opposed to any unjustified violence   and especially terror. This means that the revolutionary struggle of the   proletariat is not legitimate because it is not consistent with some   philosophical reasonable and predictable ideals, according to   neo-Kantian socialists, but simply because It's only the struggle of the   proletariat. In other words, the practical situation of the working   class in the historical process legitimizes its existence and its   struggle without any doubts. Habermas argues that Marx failed to see a   person as an agent, which means the both a tool-making and "symbolizing"   the animals, that is - labor and language are fundamental   anthropological categories in the sense, that none of these categories   cannot be reduced by one other. If you start to argue, then it means a   return to the Hegelian - Marxist "error" and believe that "justice will   inevitably turns to the extent that what should be", what history is -   the judge and "happily appears" on the side of the proletariat. In our   opinion we must first define and explain what is "proper" and truth,   before class of proletariat could be justified. Critical ethics is   logically prior and independent of historical development and such   ethics prescribes that actually preaches "ethical socialism". The   article also makes some parallels to universal prescriptivism of R. M.   Soviet author Oleg Drobnicki which considers that they both tried in   some sense to unify Kantian universalism, his main goal is not just   changing concept of historical materialism, but to bring human dignity   to agenda in Soviet ethics.
