AU Surman, Jan
TI PARIS- VIENNA- ST. PETERSBURG OR ALGIERS- BRNO- KHARKIV?: KNOWLEDGE
SO QUAESTIO ROSSICA
AB The exchange of science and knowledge between capital cities has   dominated research in recent decades. Imperial provinces have played   only a minor role in recent works partly because as independent states,   their histories are analyzed by other historians. In this article, I   propose an alternative model to conceptualize and describe the contacts   between both centers and provinces and between empires. Following ideas   of Jurij Lotman, Andreas Kappeler and Moritz Csaky, I maintain that   provinces and peripheries function as a necessary and constitutive   moment in the intellectual geography of empires, and their interplay   with the center prove essential for intellectual productivity. I discuss   such processes as multicultural and multilingual exchange, including   scholars defining themselves as Polish and Ukrainian, who helped to   transmit new knowledge to imperial centers. I claim that the periphery   is a privileged space for innovation, which is not constrained by the   center's tight control, but instead subjected to manifold influences   enabled though its heterogeneity. For instance, historiographically Kiev   served in the 19th century as a center of innovation for the Russian   empire. Similarly, John Stewart Mill's positivism was first discussed in   Russian by a multilingual scholar of Polish origin, Baltazar Kalinowski,   in St. Petersburg in the context of Polish (inner) Emigre organizations.   Philosopher Henryk Struve, professor of Warsaw Main School, then   Imperial Warsaw University, on the other hand, helps to visualize   entanglements in the sphere of logic and history of philosophy. When   Struve received his doctoral degree in Moscow, his controversial views   sparked a debate over materialism, engaging several established and   younger scholars. Also later, while predominantly writing in Polish, he   published in Russian on contemporary philosophy and logic, presenting   new insights from his western-peripheral position. Finally, while   working in Graz, the Habsburg periphery, sociologist Ludwik Gumplowicz,   of Jewish ancestry and Polish national allegiance, not only served a   pivotal role in late imperial Russian sociology but also was cited in   early Marxist works. Gumplowicz stands for manifold peripheries either   though his Jewishness, his Anti-Clericalism and / or his scholarly   position. Nonetheless, his sociology came to Russia by detouring through   France, where it was popularized first by Rene Worms and his Institut   International de Sociologie, a similarly peripheral institution, albeit   located in the very center of Paris.
