AU Pyatakov, Andrei N.
TI LATIN AMERICAN APPROACHES TO GLOBALIZATION PROBLEM: A LOOK THROUGH THE
SO MIROVAYA EKONOMIKA I MEZHDUNARODNYE OTNOSHENIYA
AB Four approaches to the globalization problem exists in Latin American   global studies: apologetical, institutional, objectivist and critical,   while two last of them are dominating. The apologetical one is   represented by minority. Within the institutional approach,   globalization appears as a function of transnational institutes'   activities, is understood as a process controlled and organized by   international financial and economic authorities. The objectivist   approach assumes the attitude on globalization as a fundamental   objective process - specifically as an asymmetric process in some sort,   a theoretical "echo" of the dependent development theory, or   "dependentism", once popular in Latin America, highlighting a structural   division of the world capitalism system into center and periphery. In   the Latin American authors' theoretical discourse, great attention is   paid to political aspects and consequences of globalization. In   particular, there are many fears and cautions before an eventual   dilution of state institutes as part of this spontaneous process. Within   the critical approach, the key concept is "neoliberal globalization". In   the most explicit way, this approach is carried out by authors belonging   to the Cuban school of Latin American global studies. The Cuban   scientists use the "transnationalization" term as a synonym of   "globalization". The most radical variety of the Marxist interpretation   of globalization assumes its understanding as the highest and last phase   of imperialism. A considerable part of Latin American authors   investigates an alternative searching of globalization perspectives. In   this regard, it is possible to single out three directions -   sociocultural, ethical and integrational. The sociocultural direction is   concentrated on the Latin American identity theoretical search. The   ethical direction continues the Latin American "liberation philosophy"   tradition. In the politological aspect, the integrational direction is   elaborated the most. A common denominator of these theoretical views is   the idea that the interstate regional integration of Latin America alone   will be able to amortize risks and minimize dangers connected to   globalization. It is viewed as a peculiar protective barrier against the   impact of multinational corporations and supranational global control   institutes related to them, both seen in Latin America as new forms of   the U.S. imperial domination. Specific for this approach is its   reference to the real international integration practice, closely   connected to the "left turn" phenomenon. Since the beginning of the 21st   century, the new integration architecture has been built in the region,   targeting at the state national sovereignty protection. Summing up, the   author proposes the following hypothesis: in the medium term, a "second   round" of the international discussion on the "globalization" conceptual   contents is quite possible as a result of large political and economic   shifts on the international scene.
