AU Thiergen, Peter
TI THE HISTORY OF RUSSIAN CONCEPTS: TO THE PROBLEM
SO IMAGOLOGIYA I KOMPARATIVISTIKA-IMAGOLOGY AND COMPARATIVE STUDIES
AB The history of concepts is a complex discipline. It has no status of an   independent subject in the high school curriculum, yet it tries to grope   its place among such well-established disciplines as etymology and   history of ideas, history of philosophy, history of culture. The history   of concepts is subject to all the risks and has all the possibilities of   interdisciplinary heuristics. In the era of the rule of biology, natural   sciences and economics, the history of concepts is suspected of   speculation, uncertainty and worthlessness. It cannot be a source of   utilitarian express-information due to its diachronic and abstract   nature. By 'concept' I mean a certain spiritual concept covering the   full complex content of the word, which is a keyword or basic concept of   the history of ideas, culture and society, i.e. spiritual history, for a   specific long or short period of time. The history of concepts explores   genetically-semantic, historical processes of formation and   transformation of these keywords. Such studies include not only   descriptive, but also significant reconstructive and sometimes   speculative, and some deliberative components. The longer the concept   exists, the more 'unfounded' and 'fathomless' it becomes. In the   immediate vicinity of the history of the concepts there is the history   of constructs, the history of ideas, historical concepts, the history of   discourse, discourse analysis, historical semantics, semantic of   cultural studies, cultural linguistics, keyword research, etc. Surely,   we must consider linguistic sciences as well: onomasiology, synonyms,   antonyms, phraseology, and so on.   fBut if Germany regularly publishes collection of works on the history   of concepts, in Russian this branch of the Humanities is in its infancy,   for several reasons. 1. The initial discipline, from which the history   of concepts originates, is philosophy. However, Russia has got a very   poorly developed philosophical tradition. The fate of philosophy and   religious philosophy in the Soviet Union is well known, while the   genuine history of concepts requires uncensored work with sources,   broad-based knowledge, the freedom of thought, and rejection of   ideology. 2. Many other important scientific branches of history of   spiritual life in Russia, and later in the Soviet Union, could not   progress properly. Classical philology and jurisprudence, which are   important for the development of the history of the concepts, survived a   'catastrophic decline' after 1917. There was no solid foundation for the   Roman law in Russia, which affected the assimilation of concepts and   moral values of personalism. The Marxist-Leninist historical science   after 1917 was based on the ideological system of coercion, which, of   course, destroyed theology and history of religion. The freedom of   thought could only exist in the internal emigration. 3. Russian and   Western linguistics primarily studied etymology, semantics, lexicology,   phraseology and terminology, rather than the classic history of the   concept. The formal models of descriptive linguistics, mathematical   linguistics and computer science are even more remote from the history   of concepts. 4. The scientific schools of literary studies such as   formalism, structuralism, rhetoric, narratology, deconstruction,   absurdism and others do not make the slightest contribution to the   history of concepts. Nowadays among the most attractive branches of the   Humanities is the theory of mass communication, communication strategies   or Iconic Turn (eye turn). The regulatory methods are far more popular   than the sense-making approaches like the history of concepts. 5. The   history of Russian concepts is even a greater complexity due to the   bilingual Russian verbal culture, i.e. the Russian-Church Slavonic   diglossia that existed before. Besides, in a certain period of Russian   history, there was the Russian-French-Church Slavonic triglossia, at   least among the Russian educated elite, to say nothing of numerous   borrowings from Greek, Latin, Dutch, Italian, German, and English. The   Russian language is overloaded with borrowings, calques and   international words, which often entail the transfer of concepts. 6. The   Russian language is characterized by the doubling of concepts. This   phenomenon is not widespread in Western languages (compare   'svoboda'/'volya', 'pravda'/'istina', 'mir'/'svet', 'uzkiy'/'tesny'   etc.).   However, despite all mentioned above, the Russian history of concepts   offers a wealth of material: it could have collected more extensive   sources and make it available. It must be acknowledged as the inevitable   difficulty that Russian concepts are in tense relationships with the   semantics of the word and the text; that being borrowed from other   languages, they are often insufficiently defined and seem to be in   limbo, hovering between the poles of meaning and opinion. What Russian   science really lacks in this field is fundamental large-scale projects,   like the historical dictionary of philosophy, or the dictionary of basic   concepts as well as special editions such as the archive of the history   of concepts. The Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS) should undertake   corresponding obligations and promote the fundamental long-term projects   in this area. Only in this way the foreseeable future can bring the   standards of western historical and conceptual studies and address the   issues of transfer of concepts and the comparative history of concepts.   A great historian Sergei Solovyov said, "We are Europeans, and European   values are not alien to us".
