AU Cheng Yanhong
TI Philosophy Speculation on System Theory of Maintaining the Healthy Life
SO PROCEEDING OF THE 5TH INTERNATIONAL YELLOW RIVER FORUM ON ENSURING WATER
AB System theory is the science on studying the general mode, structure and   regular pattern of the system. It is also a philosophy theory on   studying the ideas and methods of the system. Although the concept of   system theory comes from the study on generally things of the nature, it   plays the maximum effect on the social sphere and eventually led to the   scientific management of modern society. System theory believes that the   world is a big system. And the structure of the system determines its   function and behavior. The river changes the surface of the earth   through the erosion, transportation and stacking interaction, which is   constantly changing and replacing. It is an important open system of the   survival of humans and much other biology. Due to the uncontrolled   development on rivers by human, the rivers of worldwide today are almost   facing the crisis of survival. As the most complex refractory river of   worldwide, the Yellow River faces the crisis of survival especially   seriously. By systematically analyzing the outstanding problems of the   Yellow River, the principal contradiction of the Yellow River is less   water and more sediment, different sources of water and sediment, and   uncoordinated water-sediment relation. The source of healthy life crisis   of the Yellow River is that the relationship between human and the   Yellow River are demanded. It is the inevitable result of human moving   forward along the track of industrial civilization. Therefore, the   Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC) formally proposed the new   river training concept of maintaining the healthy life of the Yellow   River, made it as the ultimate goal of the scientific development and   management of the Yellow River, and started to build the corresponding   river training systems. In this paper, the basic tenets of Marxist   dialectical materialist view is applied to make speculation and   interpretation on maintaining the healthy life of the Yellow River from   the perspective of the system theory philosophy. Philosophical ontology,   epistemology and axiology of maintaining the healthy life of the Yellow   River, which is also analyzed. For the current practices of scientific   development and management of the Yellow River, the proposal of re   -understanding of the Yellow River, in-depth study of the Yellow River   and more respect for the Yellow River are studied and proposed.
