AU Mukhin, V. N.
TI POSITION OF THE ORTHODOX BELIEVERS IN THE SOVIET SOCIETY OF THE 1930s
SO VESTNIK PERMSKOGO UNIVERSITETA-ISTORIYA-PERM UNIVERSITY HERALD-HISTORY
AB The paper is devoted to the life of faithful Orthodox believers in the   Soviet Russia. Whereas the majority of similar works are focused on the   relations between the state and the church, the paper is aimed at   outlining the way of life of ordinary believers in the 1930s by taking   the Kazan diocese as an example. Various sources of information,   including archive data, the 1930s local media, the researches of   regional and national historians, were used in the study. The research   embraces the period between 1929 and 1940. The author analyzes the life   of priests' families, including persecutions from the state for   belonging to clergy (expulsion from educational institutions,   difficulties in entering schools and in getting employment or access to   collective goods). The author pays attention to urban believers' life,   focusing attention on negative attitude to religion in general and to   believers specifically (for instance, the idea of closing Christian   churches with the following demolishing of buildings was a widespread   question of the meetings at plants and factories). The paper also   examines rural believers' life and distinguishes two groups of   believers: migrants to cities (who were restricted in expressing their   religious position) and those who stayed in the villages, felt more   freedom in expressing their religious position and could face the legal   power in an open conflict. Special attention is paid to the fact that   under the Soviet power religious life was expelled from official life   and restricted to domestic rites. Only in the rural areas was it   possible to defend religious views in numerous groups (for instance, 200   people left the collective farm as a protest against shutting down the   local temple, whereas in the cities such a protest could be expressed   only by single believers). The author concludes that the Soviet policy   affected religious aspect of life of all social groups; the   Marxist-Leninist philosophy was incompatible with religious way of life;   such incompatibility resulted in the persecutions and repressions of the   believers; religious life went into deep hiding and was mostly   restricted to domestic rites.
