AU Teschke, Benno
TI The Dialectic of the Concrete: Reconsidering Dialectic for IR and
SO GLOBALIZATIONS
AB Modes of dialectical reasoning were introduced into International   Relations (IR) from the 1980s onwards in the context of the   post-positivist debate as an alternative intellectual resource drawn   from the philosophy of the social sciences. To the extent that the   deployment of dialectics for IR drew upon Marx and the wider Hegelian   Marxist tradition, it was challenged philosophically and substantively   on two fronts. Philosophically, the problem emerged how to disassociate   dialectics from the 'systemic' Hegelian legacy, which expressed itself   in the naturalism and monism of dialectical materialism, and how to   overcome a reading of capital as a self-unfolding conceptual category,   expressed in systematic dialectics, which de-historicised and   de-subjectified capitalism as a social relation. Substantively, the   problem remained how to anchor a Historical Sociology of international   relations in a historicist philosophy of praxis to avoid the temptation   of a relapse into structuralist modes of explanation. By addressing this   double challenge, this paper identifies a central lacuna within the   Marxist IR tradition-the gap between general Marxist theories of IR and   the analysis of foreign policy-making. This gap persists in equal   measure in the bifurcation between the fields of general IR theory and   actor-specific foreign policy analysis (FPA). For general IR   theories-Marxist and non-Marxist-tend to deploy structuralist versions   of theory, which relegate the problem of foreign policy-making to   lesser, possibly non-theorisable, forms of inquiry. FPA is thereby   demoted and subsumed under wider structural imperatives capable of   cross-case generalisation. The paper moves from a critical exposition of   the wider debate in IR and FPA of attempts to close this gap, via a   critique of dialectical materialism and systematic dialectics, to a   re-statement of the dialectic of the concrete. It concludes with a   reconsideration of how dialectical thinking may bridge this gap by   incorporating foreign policy as the crucial site for the active drawing   together and re-articulation of multiple influences from the domestic   and the foreign into a Historical Sociology of international relations.
