AU Tosel, Natascia
TI THE POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY AS "UTOPIA" IN DELEUZE AND GUATTARI
SO ANTHROPOLOGY, ARCHAEOLOGY, HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY
AB Deleuze and Guattari, in What is philosophy? (1991), expose their Image   of Thought; they consider that it is possible to think through three   disciplines: Philosophy, Science and Art. In all this structure there is   no trace of Politics: why is it absent? We cannot try here to make a   "Marxist" distinction between theory and practice, thinking that   Philosophy, Art and Science are part of the thought and therefore of the   theory, while Politics is placed on a different level, which would be   that of action and practice. Thinking in Deleuze and Guattari is act, it   means to face the chaos, it means to experiment; their constructivism   removes all doubt on the fact that Thought and Action can be given on   two totally distinct plans. Politics is therefore, according to Deleuze   and Guattari, within the Thought, and since it cannot be located either   in science or in art, in my opinion it is entirely ascribable to   Philosophy. However, Philosophy and Politics cannot completely identify   themselves. In fact they do not identify themselves even in Deleuze and   Guattari: Philosophy is creation of concepts; Politics is within   Philosophy because it is also creation of concepts, but the difference   between the two disciplines lies in the type of concepts that they   create. The concept says the event - this is its nature and remains   unchanged whether we speak of philosophical concept or political   concept; the difference lies rather in the type of event being   announced. In fact, Philosophy says the event that is in becoming, it   says the "actual", to use a term dear to Foucault, and the becoming and   the actual are distinguished from past and present, but also from   future. In fact in What is philosophy? Deleuze and Guattari write that   only when a utopian element is present, then Philosophy becomes   political and carries to the maximum degree the critic of its age. So   the becoming is doubled: there is an actual becoming, which is the   specific object of the philosophical concept, and then there is a   becoming that looks to the future, which is the basis for the political   concept. Politics can connect Philosophy with its time, and can produce   a critique of the present only because Politics looks beyond this   present and has in mind a better future and "a new people and a new   earth "- as Deleuze and Guattari say - and this is its Utopia. So it is   worth asking if to make political philosophy today may mean creating new   concepts, which contain this utopian element, that is, concepts that   privilege the dimension of the future, in addition to that -   specifically philosophical - of the becoming.
