AU Balan, Corneliu-Dragos
TI VALENCES OF FREEDOM IN PHILOSOPHY AND CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY
SO ANTHROPOLOGY, ARCHAEOLOGY, HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY
AB The concept of freedom has been understood differently in antiquity.   Thus, in the classical Greek world, freedom belongs only to a few   individuals. In Athens, only free citizens were considered truly free   and not slaves and foreigners. Linguistic history of the word "freedom"   demonstrates its origin in the society of slave owners. In such society   only the master is free, slaves, women and children, over which he   reigns are without freedom.   Over time, every ideology claimed that defends and promotes freedom,   which, however, they understand completely different one by each other.   A classic conservative sense of freedom differs from that of a   traditional liberal, for example.   Eastern Christianity claims that God's absolute freedom belongs to Him   absolutely, on Which depend all, without Himself depend on something,   God Himself restrict His freedom to His "absolutes" created beings. As   being "in the image and likeness" of absolute and uncreated God, man is   called to partake of absolute freedom, which is itself God's freedom.   The only difference of human freedom to the divine is that first there   isn't by nature, but by participation in divine freedom. Condition of   participation in this freedom is communion with God, which is achieved   by keeping the commandments. Otherwise, by transgressing commandments,   man break his communion with God and subject to decay and death and stop   to see God as a Father who loves him and builds gods who mastered him.   One of the concepts through we characterize the modern world is   undoubtedly the freedom. The original freedom, which is essential to man   was perverted by forefathers sin. Nowadays man has become a slave of   sin, of falsehood and illusion. However, the original freedom of the   human being was not totally canceled. Contemporary secularized man feels   God as an enemy of freedom. Thus, in hegeliano-marxist dialectics we   have the report between Master and slave; Freud talks about the complex   of "sadistic father" which incite to patricide, while for Nietzsche, God   is " the celestial Spy" whose view hinders; moreover, Proudhon said that   "God is the evil " and the atheist syllogism on the relationship between   freedom and God spoken by Balcunin and resumed by the existentialist   philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre is: "If God exists, I am not free; I am   free, so God does doesn't exist".   Therefore, today, human freedom exists, but the notion of freedom being   misunderstood, the ideal of freedom toward man aspires is not the   revealed one, but one invented by man. In the following lines I will try   to present the differences between what has meant the concept of   freedom, over time, in the various philosophical currents and what   represents the concept of Christian freedom.
