AU Soboleva, M. E.
TI "Critical positivism" versus "new idealism" in Russia at the beginning
SO VESTNIK SANKT-PETERBURGSKOGO UNIVERSITETA-FILOSOFIYA I KONFLIKTOLOGIYA
AB The paper focuses on the situation in Russian philosophy at the   beginning of the 20th century. Of special interest is the discussion   between the so called "critical positivism" and the "new idealism". The   former is represented by A. A. Bogdanov, P.S. Juskevic, V. A. Bazarov   and Ja. A. Berman; the latter is represented by N. A. Berdjaev, S. N.   Bulgakov, P. A. Florenskij and others. In a first step, I reconstruct   this discussion on the basis of the collected works "Problems of   idealism" (1902) and "Landmarks" (1909) from the side of the idealists,   and "Essays of realist world view" (1904), "Essays on Marxist   Philosophy" (1908), and "Essays on philosophy of collectivism" (1909)   published by the positivists. I argue that this discussion took on the   character of the struggle of worldviews: it was a struggle of the   traditional Russian paradigm of philosophical thinking against the new   type of philosophizing which was oriented towards the natural sciences.   After that, I briefly characterize the theoretical and practical   programs of "critical positivism". Its main theoretical principle is   "realism", and its core practical principle is "idealism". However, both   the concept of "realism" and the concept of "idealism" received a   completely new interpretation. Bogdanov's "empiriomonism", Juskevic's   "empiriosymbolism" and Bazarov's philosophy, which developed the ideas   of empiriocritiscism, can be seen as different modifications of the   realizing these key principles. I promote the view that we can consider   the so called "third" wave of Russian positivism (Bogdanov, Juskevic,   Bazarov) as "neopositivism", because, within this currency, the   transformation from scientific philosophy to theory of science took   place. The vivid illustration of this transformation can be seen in   Bogdanov's general theory of organization or "Tectology".
