AU Thompson, Michael J.
TI THE BASE-SUPERSTRUCTURE HYPOTHESIS AND THE FOUNDATIONS OF CRITICAL
SO MEDIATIONS OF SOCIAL LIFE IN THE 21ST CENTURY
AB Purpose - To defend the thesis that the base-superstructure hypothesis   central to Marxist theory is also central paradigm of the tradition of   Critical Theory. This is in opposition to those who see this hypothesis   as determinist and eliminating the possibilities for the autonomy of   social action. In doing so, it is able to retard and atrophy the   critical capacities of subjects.   Design/methodology/approach - Emphasis on the return to a   structural-functionalist understanding of social processes that places   this version of Critical Theory against the more domesticated forms that   consider "discourse ethics" and an "ethic of recognition" as the   normative research program for Critical Theory. Also, an analysis of the   purpose and logic of functional arguments and their relation to Marx's   concept of "determination" is undertaken.   Findings - The essence of Critical Theory hinges upon the ways that   social structures are able to deform and shape structures of   consciousness of modern subjects to predispose them to forms of   domination and to view the prevailing hierarchical structures of   extractive domination as legitimate in some basic sense.   Research limitations/implications - The foundations of Critical Theory   need to be rooted in a renewed understanding of the relation between   social structure and forms of consciousness. This means a move beyond   theories of social practices into the realm of social epistemology as   well as the mechanisms of consciousness and their relation to ideology.   Originality/value - Few analyses of the relation between the base and   the superstructure or material organization of society and the   socialepistemological layer of consciousness delineate the mechanisms   involved in shaping consciousness. I undertake an analysis that utilizes   insights from the philosophy of mind such as the theory of   intentionality as well as the sociological approach to values through   Parsons.
