AU le Cordeur, Michael
TI A preliminary impact study of a university, school and private sector
SO TYDSKRIF VIR GEESTESWETENSKAPPE
AB A preliminary impact study of a university, school and private sector   partnership project: hope for disadvantaged students through mentorships   Successful access to higher education for black students in particular   remains a challenge to all tertiary institutions in South Africa. This   is the opinion of Prof Russel Botman, Rector of Stellenbosch University   (SU). It is therefore of concern that the SU strategic framework   document (SU 2010a) states that the increase in our country's student   population projected by the National Commission for Higher Education in   1997 (DBO 1997) has not been attained. This is in contrast with the   University's vision for the future, which commits itself to an academic   institution of excellence and a respected knowledge partner that   contributes towards the development of South Africa and welcomes a   diversity of people and ideas. But according to a report by the Centre   for Higher Education Transformation (CHET)(1) little demographic   transformation had occurred in respect of who participates in higher   education. This is an indication that black students,chances of gaining   access to university have in fact decreased.   Despite this authorities continue to insist that the percentage of black   students in public higher-education institutions be increased. The   Ministry's vision is of a transformed, democratic, non-racial and   non-sexist system of higher education that will promote equity of access   and fair chances of success to all who are seeking to realise their   potential through higher education (DBO 1997). The Vice-Rector of SU   (Fourie 2009b:16) expands on this: "Besides the moral-ethical   considerations, pressure is also being placed on universities by higher   education policy to diversify their student and staff compositions and   to remove measures that could exclude certain groupings".   Stellenbosch University is thus under pressure to align its diversity   profile with the transformation goals set by the government, as   proclaimed in the White Paper on Higher Education of 1997. At the same   time the University also experiences pressure from the broader community   to answer to the call of alleviating poverty in disadvantaged   communities (SU 2010a). However, the standard of teaching in previously   disadvantaged schools in the surrounding areas is such that very few   students qualify to further their studies at university level. The   question therefore is what the University can do to draw students that   will rise to these challenges. In his response the University announced   a strategy referred to by the current vice-chancellor (Botman 2007) as a   "pedagogy of hope". This seems to have been inspired by the neo-Marxist   Brazilian educationalist Paulo Friere's publication Pedagogy of the   oppressed (1970). According to this strategy the University will search   for and exploit opportunities that will lead to "the farm owner daughter   and the farm worker,s son sitting in the same class" (Botman 2007).   This gave rise to initiatives such as the Rachel's Angels Schools   Partnership Project, which is based on the principles of community   interaction.(2) The project aims to build the capacity of promising   students from disadvantaged communities with the aid of a mentorship   programme. This will enable them to bridge the gap between school and   university successfully. This article presents an overview of the   project as well as a report on its impact. The educational theories   which underpin the Rachel's Angels project can be considered to be   constructivist in nature, founded upon a philosophy that is student   centred and based on a view in which knowledge is not absolute, but is   actively constructed by the student. The study aims to establish whether   the project has achieved the desired outcomes. If employed successfully,   SU will give effect to its transformation agenda, which includes   increased participation by a diverse corps of students, willingness to   react to social and economic needs and growing cooperation between   higher education institutions and all sectors of society. The results of   the impact study indicate that, despite growing pains, the project has   already made a meaningful contribution in building the capacity of   disadvantaged students. The implications for the University are to   continuously engage in partnerships with previously disadvantaged   schools in order to unlock the potential of disadvantaged students. Not   only will it reflect positively on the University's diversity profile,   but at the same time give meaning to the University's quest for a   "pedagogy of hope".
