AU de Villiers, Johan
TI The discipline of history and the New South Africa - should South
SO TYDSKRIF VIR GEESTESWETENSKAPPE
AB The discipline of history and the New South Africa - should South   African history be re-written?   History is a discipline of humanities which records and analyses past   events. It is a narrative or chronicle of human endeavour and experience   in time. Constant change is an intrinsic characteristic of all forms of   history. Traditional cyclical views of history have long ago been   replaced by a linear cognisance and presentation of past events in a   chronological sequence, implying a beginning and an expected fulfilment.   This means that previous individuals, societies and developments are   unique. Consequently, the question arises whether it is of any use to   acquire a thorough knowledge of past events and achievements. A   qualified YES would be the appropriate answer.   Change is a paradoxical idea. It is the notion of alteration combined   with the notion of remaining the same. According to Michael Oakeshott   change is nothing other than inherent continuity. One should distiguish   between the past as such and written history. The historian must rely on   multiple voices of the past, sometimes called representations of   pastness. Such evidence of the past may be found in written documents,   oral recollections and artefacts. The historian can never truly know the   complete reality of the past. It is the historian's duty to reveal   existing myths and to convey to the world what they discover about past   reality in order to promote the legitimate use of history and check the   abuse of this vital human science.   From the explanation of historical scholarship mentioned above it seems   unfair and unnecessary to ask whether South African history should be   re-written at the commencement of the twenty first century In the   re-writing of South African history new issues, challenges and   opportunities must always be addressed within the context of our   particular time and environment in a responsible manner In present day   South Africa historians are faced with a complex, fragmented and   heterogeneous rainbow nation. A truly South African identity is in   continuous development. This requires constant re-interpretation,   revision and re-writing of history, based on all available and   accessible sources. Each generation is bound to write its own history.   Today the wheel of history has undoubtedly turned, due to fresh and   challenging questions asked by a new generation.   During the previous century four distinct phases of South African   history developed, namely English orientated liberal history, Afrikaner   nationalistic history, Marxist radical history and Africanist   nationalistic history. Today the re-interpretation of South African   history demands a new perspective of the South African position within   the global household. In a multi-cultural society each group will have   to maintain its own particular or private history to appreciate its own   identity. Such individual histories may subsequently contribute to a   more general and balanced history of South Africa. During the past two   decades van Aswegen's History of South Africa to 1854, Liebenberg en   Spies' South Africa in the Twentieth Century and Giliomee and Mbenga's A   New History of South Africa attempted to re-interpret our past. Such   representative histories can never be final. The result will always   remain open and incomplete. A multi-perspective approach to the past   seems to be, however, the most acceptable and appropriate focus on the   vast and intricate background of South Africa's unique population.   A few guidelines may serve the purpose of achieving a comprehensive   history of South Africa in our present situation. We need to take   account of the different prevailing traditions and perceptions of past   reality in our communities. We must avoid a tunnel vision in our   research approach and appreciate the fact that South Africa is an   integral part of the world at large. In a truly democratic society   historical consciousness and knowledge will provide essential qualities   to a vibrant community life and responsible citizenship. The teaching of   history at all levels must be promoted by well trained and enthusiastic   teachers and lecturers. The reading culture of society must be supported   by well stocked libraries and the availability of electronic media.   Newspapers, radio and television must stimulate critical thinking about   the past. Cultural museums and heritage sites must constantly remind   people of their common roots and proud ancestors. Thus the history of   South Africa will be constantly re-assessed and re-written, not because   previous historians produced poor histories, but because the context   within which their histories were written, has dramatically changed.
