AU Lai Pan-chiu
TI Cultural Theory and Christian Studies: An Introduction
SO LOGOS & PNEUMA-CHINESE JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY
AB In recent years, there are many significant exchanges among scholars of   cultural studies or cultural theory and scholars of Christian Studies.   Some cultural theorists, e.g. Alain Badiou, attempted to explore and   evaluate the political implications of Christian theology, especially   that of St. Paul. Apart from a few with strong religious background,   e.g. Michel de Certeau, many of the cultural theorists are not   Christians in term of religious affiliation. However, they actively   engaged in critical dialogue with Christian theologians. The debate   between Slavoj Zizek and John Milbank is one of the notable examples.   Some Christian theologians, including Kathryn Tanner, Graham Ward and   Kwok Pui-lan, make use of some cultural theories to analyze Christian   theology.   There are some apparent similarities between these cultural theorists   and the proponents of Sino-theology. Many of the latter are neither   professional theologians nor active members of Christian churches, but   very familiar with Marxist philosophy and well aware of the political   issues related to culture. They discuss theological ideas primarily from   cultural perspectives and engage in dialogue with church theologians as   well as non-religious intellectuals in China.   The interactions between cultural theory and Christian Studies in the   Western academia are relevant to Sino-theology in several ways. Firstly,   the happening of this interplay in the Western academia confirms the   legitimacy of the endeavour of Sino-theology in promoting theological   discussion in the academia rather the Christian churches. Secondly, the   contemporary understanding of culture, with its emphasis on the facture   and struggle of ordinary culture rather than the unity of high culture,   supports the agenda of Sino-theology to break with indigenous theology,   which tends to accommodation Christian theology to the traditional   Chinese culture, and to focus on the theological task related to the   dynamic and pluralistic culture of contemporary China, including the   critique of national ideology. Thirdly, the Marxist background of these   cultural theories may facilitate and enhance the dialogue between the   proponents of Sino-theology and other intellectuals in contemporary   China.   In short, the interactions among cultural theory and Christian Studies   in the Western academia may inspire the discussion concerning   Sino-theology and deserve to be studied thoroughly in the context of   contemporary China.
