AU Bianco, Giuseppe
TI Experience vs. Concept? The Role of Bergson in Twentieth-Century French
SO EUROPEAN LEGACY-TOWARD NEW PARADIGMS
AB In one of his last writings, Life: Experience and Science, Michel   Foucault argued that twentieth-century French philosophy could be read   as dividing itself into two divergent lines: on the one hand, we have a   philosophical stream which takes individual experience as its point of   departure, conceiving it as irreducible to science. On the other hand,   we have an analysis of knowledge which takes into account the concrete   productions of the mind, as are found in science and human practices. In   order to account for this division, Foucault opposed epistemologists   such as Cavaille's and Canguilhem to phenomenologists such as   Merleau-Ponty and Sartre but, also, and more particularly, he opposed   Poincare to Bergson. The latter was presented by Foucault as being the   key-figure of the "philosophy of experience" at the beginning of the   twentieth century. Fifteen years later, in his Deleuze and in the Logics   of Worlds, Alain Badiou again uses this dual structure in his   interpretation of the past hundred years of French thought. He employs a   series of oppositional couples: himself and Deleuze, Lautmann and   Sartre, and, finally, Brunschvicg and Bergson. On the one hand a   "mathematical Platonism" and on the other a "philosophy of vital   interiority.'' This Manichean reading of philosophy, and the strategic   use of the figure of Bergson has, itself, a long tradition. It was also   proposed by Althusser who, following Bachelard, opposed his standpoint   to any form of "empiricism." Althusser developed his thought from a   tradition of Marxist thinkers and ideologists, which included Politzer's   and Nizan's critique of bourgeois philosophy and, even before that,   neo-Kantians such as the philosophers of the Revue de metaphysique et de   morale. The aim of this essay is to deconstruct and to put into its   precise context of production this series of genealogies which entails   the mobilization of Bergsonism and of the name 'Bergson.' By doing so, I   hope to weight the importance of Bergsonism in twentieth-century French   philosophy, in both its "positive" and its "negative" aspect. The essay   will proceed regressively, taking into account figures such as   Althusser, Badiou, Deleuze, Foucault, Canguilhem, Cavaille's, Sartre,   Merleau-Ponty, but also Polizer, Brunschvicg and Alain. The conclusion   of the essay is an attempt at reading the "Bergson renaissance" in the   light of new discoveries in genetics and the cognitive sciences and to   tie it to the renewal of studies in the history of French philosophy.
