AU Levant, Alex
TI From the History of Soviet Philosophy: Lukacs - Vygotsky - Ilyenkov
SO HISTORICAL MATERIALISM-RESEARCH IN CRITICAL MARXIST THEORY
AB This review-essay explores the subterranean tradition of 'creative   Soviet Marxism'(1) through a recent book by the Russian philosopher   Sergey Mareev, From the History of Soviet Philosophy: Lukacs - Vygotsky   - Ilyenkov (2008). It provides a brief overview of the history of Soviet   philosophy so as to orient the reader to a set of debates that continue   to be largely unexplored in the Western-Marxist tradition. Mareev offers   a new account of the development of Soviet philosophy that not only   explodes the myth that Soviet philosophy was simply state-sanctioned   dogma, but also reinterprets the relationship between the key creative   theorists so as to offer a new way of understanding its development that   challenges several key-aspects of the dominant Western scholarship on   this subject. He argues that alongside official Marxist philosophy in   the Soviet Union - the crude materialism of Diamat and Istmat - there   existed another line, which counterposed the central role of social   activity in the development of human consciousness. He traces this line   of anti-positivist theory from V. I. Lenin through Georg Lukacs and Lev   Vygotsky to Evald Ilyenkov - a pivotal figure in the 'Marxian   renaissance'(2) of the 1960s, but who 'has to this day remained a Soviet   phenomenon without much international influence'.(3) Specifically,   Mareev disputes the role of A. M. Deborin as a precursor of the Ilyenkov   school, and instead introduces Georg Lukacs - a figure primarily   recognised in the West as one of the founders of Western Marxism - into   the line of development of creative Soviet Marxism. Furthermore, he   reconsiders the role of V. I. Lenin and G. V. Plekhanov - the so-called   father of Russian social democracy - in the development of Soviet   philosophy. In the process, the author provides a detailed history of   the emergence of Diamat and Istmat, and shines a spotlight on a figure   widely recognised as the most important Soviet philosopher in the   post-Stalin period - E. V. Ilyenkov.
