AU Vega, Amparo
TI Perspectives of Aesthetics and Politics in J. F. Lyotard
SO REVISTA DE ESTUDIOS SOCIALES
AB The central perspectives and concepts of the aesthetics and politics of   the philosophy of Jean-Francoise Lyotard are presented in this text. The   emergence from the war leads Lyotard, starting with his first texts in   1948, to question politics, ask for a critical philosophy   (Phenomenology, 1954), and a later distance himself from philosophy   during the years in which he became a militant with the Marxist group   which published the magazine Socialism or Barbarism, with which he   remains until 1966. Why Philosophyze (1964) captures the aforementioned   experience and defines the orientation and research themes of later   investigations of critical philosophy from which aesthetics, politics,   and the concepts that relate these two areas are given thought. A first   critical perspective of aesthetics focuses on the relationship between   desire and arts, and between desire and the critical discourse, starting   with Discourse, figure (1971) and ending with Libidinal Economy (1974).   This study ends with a Nietzsche-like aesthetic and politic described as   paths adrift with the strongest of libidinal intensities. The evaluation   of these practices in libidinal economy and the devices of capitalism,   in particular, lead Lyotard to change his perspective. From pragmatic   analyses of the games of language in discourses, knowledge and tales, as   well as the practices and institutions of advanced societies, The   Postmodern Condition (1982-1985) integrates the aesthetic manner of   reflexive judgement (Kant) to the proposal of a postmodern "critical   knowledge". The Enthusiasm (1986) proposes a analogy of aesthetic and   critical judgment applied to the political. Due to the multiplication of   languages and their heterogeneity, unsolvable conflicts arise which are   analyzed by Lyotard, mostly under the concept of diferend (The   Difference, 1983), the sublime in The Postmodern Explained to Children,   and The Inhuman. In covering these issues, this text defines steps and   analogous elements between critique, aesthetics, and politics.
