AU Hudacek, Milan
TI Theology pluralism movements and their transfer into the Slovak history
SO CIRKVE 19 A 20 STOLETI VE SLOVENSKE A CESKE HISTORIOGRAFII
AB The development in Europe and domestic theological school in Spisska   Kapitula before 1949 had given an impulse to theological pluralism. The   marxist ideology ironically had helped the process which stimulated   theological thinking in the twentieth century based on practical-social   analysis and attempting to interpret historical events. The spirit of   openness of John XXIII. inspired Jozef Uhrin to work, using Pope's   method in a way that a historian does not use historicism as normative   for his work. Instead he is making historicism in his historical   approach to religious and societal questions. His active commitment to   the theology field and Church's historiography showed a way to Christian   message inculturation under conditions of socialist social order. In a   sharp contrast to his interpretative study stands the effort of Jan   Chryzostom Korec. In his work until 1989 Korec discharges   practical-social theological movement of marxist analysis and in all   human solidarity gives priority to historical interpretation that   assists a fight for justice in the socialist Czechoslovakia.   Social movements in 1968 has made it possible for newly accepted   professors of Theology faculty in Bratislava a comeback to   interpretation models which rely on neo-scholasticism in philosophy and   theology A way in this metaphysics-hermeneutical line has showed   attractive to the work of historians from younger generations, Viliam   Judaic and Jozef Halo. They established social search of the Church as a   stable institution when writing history or they put her forward as a   visible sacramental sign.   Among Slovaks in foreign countries springs out an original look at life   from existential level. Felix Litva has attempted to look at historical   events of Slovak Canadian and American believers from years of   1952-1999.   Final question in this article is about whether it is possible   positively interpret theologically reasoned mission of Ostpolitik by   cardinal Agostino Casaroli in Czechoslovakia (1963-1989) and for what   Church's model. It is not excluded that a historian will do an excellent   work after he can answer the question of profiles in historiographical   efforts.
