AU Mazeikis, Gintautas
TI E.GENDROLIS' THEORY OF COMMUNITARIAN DEVELOPMENT OF THE HUMAN BEING
SO PROBLEMOS
AB Considerations of philosopher and social anthropologists Edmundas   Gendrolis (1938-1994) about self-imagination and self-understanding of   human beings from the point of social and cultural anthropology and   paleoanthropology are analyzed. Gendrolis supported his considerations   by theories and methodologies, researches of social and cultural   anthropology, paleoanthropology, ethology, Marxist philosophy. The aim   of the article is to show the specificity of his philosophical   anthropological considerations, especially of theory of communitarian   ideation, development of conscious solidarity, cultural continuity from   the time of Homo erectus. The article shows that Gendrolis moderately   criticized the Marxist theory of work, zoological individualism, linear   evolutionarism, Eurocentrism, racism and cultural segregation. He tried   to resist the colonial and neocolonial tendencies in anthropological   discourses and to support common postcolonial attitudes to the history   of tribes and small nations. On the contrary, he developed ideas of E   Boas, multilinear cultural Evolutionarism, ideas of L. A. White, M.   Sahlins, E. R. Service and the dialectical approach to the complexity of   issues of the human being. Such issues are morphological changes of   paleoanthropos and neoanthropos, domestic life and household, exogamy   and taboo, totems and early forms of faith, tools of the work and art   pictures. He tried to develop the humanistic approach to the Homo   erectus and Neanderthals as the basis for the future humanistic   interpretation of traditional tribes and small nations. Such   considerations corresponded to the Lithuanian world conception and to   the attempts to liberate themselves from the Soviet occupation and   Soviet cultural hegemony.   He maintained the main subject of self-comprehending thinking to be   community and its skills of cooperation and ideation. Ideation is the   process of forming and relating ideas, images and ideals. The process of   ideation, the making of abstract solutions and conceptual memory depends   on community network, trust, solidarity that could be supported by   common rituals, games, art, by the process of education of children.   Ideation influenced the skills of hunters, pickers, formed wedding   rules, trade among the modern Homini sapiens. And vice versa: all human   activities supported and developed the process of abstract thinking and   collective ideation. The integral approach to the issues of human being   and the theory of multilinear evolution of them became the basis for   criticism of Marxist anthropology. He criticized Marxism as well as   social Darwinism and any other evolutionism as too much teleological,   deterministic and dogmatic theories.   His other critical point is about zoological individualism which   accumulates a lot of negative interpretations of savages and provides   cultural aggression.   However, Gendrolis stayed alone from the European social or cultural   anthropological movement, and his very large and quite deep   considerations didn't become the beginning of the institutional   development of social or cultural anthropological studies in Lithuania.   He developed a very little dialog with local ethnologists, and it was   the reason for narrow interpretations of his theories. However, his   books, articles and ideas are interesting and actual for modern social   and philosophical anthropologists.
