AU Matejovic, Pavel
TI TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE POETICS OF CHAOS IN POLISH, CZECH AND SLOVAK
SO SLOVAK REVIEW OF WORLD LITERATURE RESEARCH
AB In the overview study the author outlines "the poetics of chaos", which   is programmatically present in Polish, Czech and Slovak cultural context   approximately from the 1960s. He also asks whether this term can be   understood as a legitimate and a correct literary-aesthetic category or   whether we should rather speak about an estranging metaphor which arches   over the problematic of dynamic, non-linear and pulsating structures.   Although it is a term describing processes in natural sciences (quantum   physics, deterministic chaos and fractal geometry) it is gradually   emerging in human sciences (especially in philosophy, aesthetics and   literary science).   In a short historical sketch, the author of the study follows the   beginnings of this poetics in modern art, in the avant-garde, in   formalism and in Czech structuralism. He considers Mukarovsky's article   Intentionality and Non-Intentionality in Art (Zamernost a nezamernost v   umeni) to be the key text in which Mukarovsky argues that a work of art   as a whole is not only a product of an intentional creative process but   of many things that transcend intentionality. Mukarovsky's text paves   the way to "the poetics of chaos". By the same token, chaos can bee seen   as something in the background, as a contrasting and at the same time a   complementary element to order (chaos and order are always present).   The author directs attention to two studies from the 1960s. The first   one is J. Bartos' Category of the Accidental in the History of   Philosophical Thinking (Kategorie nahodileho v dejinach filosofickeho   mysleni, 1965) which similarly to Kosik's Dialectics of Concrete   (Dialektika konkretniho, 1966) develops the Marxist philosophy,   previously tied to the ideological dogmatism of the 1950s. The second   study is Stanislaw Lem's Philosophy of Chance (Filozofia przypadku,   1968) whose philosophical impact not only closes up the temporal context   but also creates the theoretical point for the present thinking of "the   aesthetics of chaos" as well as the deconstruction or post-structural   ism.   The article further explores the influence of "the poetics of chaos" on   theoretical thinking in the 1980s and in the 1990s. In Czech cultural   context it is the collection of papers Geometry of the Living (Geometrie   ziveho, 1989), D. Hodova's ... at the edge of chaos... (... na okraji   chaosu..., 2001), and in Slovakia O. Cepan's Literary-theoreical   Articles (Literarnoteoreticke state, 2003) and R Zajac' Pulsation of   Literature (Pulzovanie literatury, 1993). The author also notes the   present development in Poland where Humanists about Chaos Theory   (Humanisci wobec teorii chaosu, 2006) and Rafal Koschany's monograph   Chance (Przypadek, 2006) appeared.   From the diachronic point of view the author calls the attention to the   oscillatory character of this poetics. There are periods in which the   need for a formal and semantic unification stresses the basic creative   principle. At other times this formal and semantic unity is disturbed.   The preference for aesthetic categories which are closer to "the poetics   of chaos" is typical of transitory periods. After they have gradually   faded, came the need for synthesis, harmony and wholeness.
