AU Middleton, Sue
TI Henri Lefebvre on education: Critique and pedagogy
SO POLICY FUTURES IN EDUCATION
AB The spatial turn' in education policy studies fuelled interest in   Lefebvre's work: initially, in his work Production of Space and, more   recently, Rhythmanalysis and Right to the City. Yet, although in these   texts Lefebvre critiques universities and schools and introduces   original pedagogical concepts, their educational strands have attracted   little attention. Lefebvre's other works available in English have been   largely overlooked in education literature. As France's first Professor   of Sociology, Lefebvre was passionately engaged with education: in   particular, teaching, competing for government grants and leading   student activism. Critiques of education are threaded through Lefebvre's   three-volume Critique of Everyday Life, his writings on architecture and   anthologies. Lefebvre's work, The Explosion, is surprisingly neglected.   A critique of French universities, it analyses student protests across   Paris in 1968 - events in which Lefebvre was a leading activist. In   geography and philosophy there are burgeoning secondary literatures on   Lefebvre. Laying groundwork for such a literature in education, I survey   Lefebvre's references to education in all the works available in   English. Arguing that Lefebvre was an educational thinker in his own   right, this paper sketches a roadmap' for educational readings of   Lefebvre's prolific and largely sociological writing. This paper falls   into three parts. The first uncovers core Marxist and phenomenological   foundations of Lefebvre's critiques of universities and schools.   Building on these, it introduces Lefebvre's pedagogical concepts. The   second part contextualises these in relation to New' (or Progressive')   education movements at critical moments' of 20th-century history. It   includes a case study of one such moment - the 1968 Parisian student   uprising - then outlines Lefebvre's summation of education in the late   20th century. The third part draws together four Lefebvrian' pedagogical   principles and considers their relevance today. Educational readings of   Lefebvre, I suggest, can help educationists identify cracks or   interstices' in technocratic rationality', suggesting strategies for   resisting contemporary neo-liberal regimes.
