AU Creaven, S
TI Materialism, agnosticism and God
SO JOURNAL FOR THE THEORY OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR
AB The longstanding philosophical debate between idealism and materialism   has recently entered the ontological terrain of critical realism (CR)   and dialectical critical realism (DCR). This has been initiated by Roy   Bhaskar's most recent book, From East to West, which attempts an   ambitious synthesis of philosophy, social theory and theology. On die   one hand, Bhaskar's attempt to root his philosophy and social theory in   a 'realist theory of God' has found an echo within the CR and DCR   research camp, some of whose members would urge us to take seriously the   possibility of a 'religious sociology'. On the other hand, Bhaskar's   abrupt 'idealist turn' has left many critical realists flabbergasted and   horrified, particularly those working at the interface between realist   philosophy and Marxist social science, especially since Bhaskar's new   philosophical trajectory is radically at odds with the 'synchronic   emergent powers materialism' outlined in his The Possibility of   Naturalism.   In response to this 'split' within the CR and DCR camp, the spectre of   'realist agnosticism' has been raised and defended by Mervyn Hartwig in   this journal. Since neither science nor philosophy can settle the issue   of what kind of stuff constitutes 'rock bottom reality', it is rational   to be agnostic on the 'ultimate question'. to deny positively affirming   the claims of either one side or the other. Now this is the move that is   resisted in this paper. My argument is that ontological idealism is   disputable on a number of grounds-philosophical, scientific, ethical and   political. In particular, I argue that objective idealism is unsupported   by rational knowledge, is riddled with conceptual and logical defects,   is contrary to the logic of scientific discovery, and is an obstacle to   eudaimonia (human emancipation). Further, since realist agnosticism   rests its case on the myth of infallible knowledge, and obviously stands   or falls with the defensibility or otherwise of objective idealism, this   gives us 'good enough' reasons for accepting a thoroughgoing materialism   as the ontological foundation of social theory.
