AU WILDES, FT
TI RECENT THEMES IN CONSERVATION PHILOSOPHY AND POLICY IN THE UNITED-STATES
SO ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION
AB A key characteristic of conservation in the United States is the   dichotomy between two main philosophies. One of these is anthropocentric   and utilitarian, advocating the wise use of Nature and natural   resources, while the other is basically ecocentric, as it espouses   principles of non-use and preservation. This dualism has existed since   the early days of the conservation movement, when the formerly   uncontrolled use of a supposedly limitless natural environment finally   gave way to a policy of resource management which was designed to   conserve Nature and resource availability within the framework of human   utilization. Generally opposed to this historically dominant paradigm   were those who believed in preserving Nature for its own sake, and who   have laboured over the years to modify and ameliorate the prevalent,   central pattern.   After a period of relative unconcern, conservation underwent a   resurgence as part of the environmental movement of the 1960s and 1970s.   Environmental quality was the key concern, being highlighted by problems   of pollution and degradation of the natural habitat. While providing the   impetus for some broad environmental and conservation measures, this   central focus directed primary attention to setting the problems. The   traditional dominance of utilitarian resource management was maintained,   relying on our managerial and scientific skills to address heightened   environmental concerns. The era also spawned a number of other   philosophies and themes. These have included a renewed sense of the   ethics and spirituality of Nature, the emergence of ecology as a   publicly-recognized-as-important field of science, 'greener' ecocentric   movements, theories advocating more radical change, neo-Marxist theory   on the relationship between Man and Nature, and various themes on   limiting environmental growth and stress especially imposed by   ever-increasing human numbers.   Sustainable utilization ('development') represents the dominant paradigm   at present. It advocates an anthropocentric but ecologically   conservative philosophy towards Nature and the use of natural resources.   The central bias attempts to balance conservation concerns with the need   for economic development. This is a difficult task, given the typical   priority of economic considerations. Other conservation themes,   particularly those which address human values and needs, have had some   positive effect, while the impact of ecology has been significant. These   influences will hopefully increase to provide a better balance, and a   brighter future, in the relationship between humans and their   environment.
