AU SIEMEK, MJ
TI POLAND - PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY
SO STUDIES IN SOVIET THOUGHT
AB In the former socialist countries the relation of philosophy to social   reality, as shaped by the political interests of the State, must be   considered for each particular case with a view to the historical   dynamics of its own development. The Polish case is not typical in this   regard - it was determined by the failure of forced sovietization at the   institutional, cultural level and the maintenance of Poland's   traditional contacts with Western European culture. In this regard   Polish universities played an important role since they preserved   'normal' structures of academic activity.   Philosophy in Poland has been marked by three currents which managed to   rebuff the advances of Marxism. Best known among them is the Lwow-Warsaw   school of logic and analytic philosophy. Its contribution is especially   important in the methodology of philosophical inquiry and the style of   responsible philosophical discourse. Though not a bed of political   opposition the school's members mounted a 'spiritual opposition' to   Marxism, especially during the Solidarity period. Catholic philosophy,   as represented by the Catholic University of Lublin (KUL), has been and   remains a completely independent force in Eastern and Central Europe.   Doctrinally, Catholic philosophy in Poland has been divided between a   more traditional, dated Thomism and the more progressive circles in   Cracow where Western European philosophy, especially phenomenology,   existentialism, and hermeneutics, has been influential (the significance   of Jozef Tischner and Karol Wojtyla, now Pope Jean Paul II). The third   major current, centered in Cracow, is the phenomenology of Roman   Ingarden, whose influence is manifest in a style of philosophizing that   has attracted professional philosophers as well as committed   intellectuals from different disciplines.   Against this diversified background Marxism had to prove its mettle, a   requirement that explains the unique internal differentiation and   pluralism within Polish Marxist philosophy. The decisive factors in its   development were its rejection of Soviet Marxism-Leninism and the   opening to Western Marxism. The often remarked 'revisionist' character   of Polish Marxism consists in the recognition by its most talented   representatives of the fundamental incompatibility between Marxism as   the ideological legitimation of the Communist state and as a philosophy   subject to rational criteria. In effect, Polish Marxists thought the   theory through to its end, and in this sense brought to light its   inherently unstable nature: to be a philosophy it would have to cease to   be Marxist, to be Marxist means having to pander to ideology.   The confrontation of the diverse currents in Polish philosophy   contributed to an unfortunate result: for political reasons non-Marxists   steered clear of social philosophical questions, while official Marxism,   which suppressed the 'revisionist' trend, obfuscated the relation   between philosophy and social reality. Today philosophy in Poland has   the urgent task to contribute to the reconstruction of a social   rationality combining a critical consciousness with moral elements of   commitment and responsibility.
