AU RUBEN, P
TI PHILOSOPHY AND THE LEGACY OF MARX
SO STUDIES IN SOVIET THOUGHT
AB What is the fate of philosophy as the spiritual weapon of the   proletariat in changing reality when it is clear that the communist   experiment has failed? The question pertains above all to the heritage   of Marx's theory, not to Marxism and Marxism-Leninism. The latter are   party-inspired and -dominated and aspire to be schools of philosophy,   whereas Marx did not seek to create a philosophy but to realize   philosophy in the material world. For Marx, philosophy and emancipation   go hand in hand: man is emancipated when philosophy is realized in the   world.   The fate of the Marxian idea is set off against the development of   dialectical materialist philosophy and Marxist social theory. In this   way, the ground is laid for the conclusion that what is properly   philosophical in Marx is restricted to a philosophy of history attendant   on a theory of economic development The conclusion is subject to the   caveat that as yet unpublished notes by Marx about the true nature of   dialectic may in fact reveal a more far-reaching philosophical   conception.   The realization of philosophy seems like a romantic illusion against the   background of the events in Germany in autumn 1989. The working masses   have elected capital as the basis of their future social existence, thus   putting paid to the Marxian theme of class struggle. The fundamental   conclusion is that Marx's vision of the task of philosophy is vitiated   by a deep-rooted ambivalence: on one hand it is the 'head' of   emancipation but on the other hand it neglects, indeed suppresses,   historical details, as shown by the example of the dialectic of class   struggle and class exchange. This kind of suppression, neglect, comes to   the fore in Marx's writing whenever he substitutes his romantic vision   of the deprived proletariat for social science. This blind eye to detail   is at the root of the later ideologization of Marxist theory and its   subordination to local party interests.
