AU BUCHHOLZ, A
TI THE END OF MARXISM-LENINISM
SO STUDIES IN SOVIET THOUGHT
AB Classical Soviet Marxism-Leninism is in the process of dissolution, with   some parts of the ideology being rejected, others retained in one form   or another, and new components being adopted. At the same time, a   wide-ranging pluralism of new objectives and forms of consciousness has   emerged in Soviet intellectual life. Since both the motives for   restructuring and also the braking effects acting on the process of   perestrojka are significantly dependent upon intellectual and   ideological developments, attentive observations of these developments   is of particular importance for the assessment of the evolutionary   prospects of the Soviet Union. At present the situation on the   ideological-intellectual front can be characterized as follows: 1.   Although official changes in the ideology did not begin until 1989 they   have caught up to the initial perestrojka in political and cultural   life. 2. Perestrojka has continually waned in importance as an   ideological by-word largely under the influence of Gorbachv's 'new   thinking' which has turned attention to the dramatic history of the   Soviet Union and the plight of the human individual in a society with   few prospects for the future. 3. In philosophy the new textbook   published in 1989/90 introduces a series of crucial innovations that put   paid to a number of classical shibboleths of the Marxist-Leninist world   view. 4. Academic philosophy has shifted more and more to a   reexamination of the history of philosophy as well as to a reappraisal   of pre-revolutionary Russian thought. 5. The critique of Stalinism has   gradually given way to a critique of Marxist principles generally, and   even Lenin has become the subject of criticism. 6. Fast on the heels of   the new thinking and the ideological deconstruction come the voices of   political orientations whose differences are so pronounced as to have   warranted the compilation of an 'Atlas of ideologies'. 7. The search for   a new moral identity has concentrated on three sources: the   reestablishment of links with classical Russian culture, the renewal of   links with Europe, and the deep-seated need to commit oneself to some   ideal for sacrifice. 8. The economic crisis has produced attitudes   hostile to individual gain and speculation. 9. Given the nature of the   Soviet crisis intellectual cooperation with the West has to take forms   which promote the rekindling of a sense of all-human awareness of the   transcendent and reinforce the experience of common humanity. 10. The   establishment of all-European academic institutions designed in their   very structure to engage in mutual cooperation could have a catalytic   effect on the reconfiguration of Europe.
