AU ARNASON, JP
TI PRAXIS AND ACTION - MAINSTREAM THEORIES AND MARXIAN CORRECTIVES
SO SOCIOLOGICKY CASOPIS
AB The Parsonian and post-Parsonian action frame of reference was, among   other things, an attempt to unify a fragmented tradition, and its later   critics have measured its performance against this claim The critique   which paves the way for the Parsonian project is mainly directed against   an inadequate conception of rational action; the constructive part of   the argument centers on the normative structure of social action. The   result is a very selective synthesis of the traditional sources In   particular, the predominant interest in the rational and normative   dimensions of action leads Parsons to neglect earlier insights into its   creative and transformative capacities. The latter aspects were among   the main themes of the philosophy of praxis. But although the Parsonian   model of action has come under extensive criticism from various angles   the concept of praxis has not played an important role in this context.   Even those who explicitly link their critique of Parsons to the Marxian   notion of praxis, e.g. Giddens, seem less interested in its later   career. Conversely, one of the major weakness of the philosophy of   praxis was its failure to draw the appropriate lessons from the   sociological critique of Marx, and to bring them to bear on the   basis-superstructure model, which it tended to bypass rather than   destroy. There was no attempt in the philosophy of praxis to combine the   move beyond the paradigm of production with Weber's and Durkheim's   arguments against economic reductionism, or - to put the same point   another way - with their insights into the radical autonomy and   constitutive role of culture and politics. Once again, the   interconnected problematics of culture and power appear as a testing   ground for alternative theories of action. They have been selected on   both sides of the debate. Neo-Marxist and post-Marxist concepts of   praxis are clearly deficient in this regard, but the Parsonian synthesis   can also be questioned more effectively if rational and normative   structures are regarded as ways of coordinating the patterns of culture   and power.
