AU Savin, Alexey
TI DEHISTORIZATION AND HISTORICITY IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE "EARLY" MARCUSE
SO HORIZON-FENOMENOLOGICHESKIE ISSLEDOVANIYA
AB The article aims to explain the connection of Marcuse's concept of   dehistorization with his interpretation and criticism of the   Heideggerian concept of historicity. Dehistorization in Marcuse's   philosophy, according to my tentative definition, is the kind of   transformation of the creative social forces and human abilities denying   an existing reality that makes them elements of the mechanism producing   and reproducing the existent reality, and thereby makes them a manner of   repression of the human striving for freedom and happiness and a way to   perpetuate domination. According to Marcuse, dehistorization is the main   form of reproduction of the false totality. The idea of dehistorization   is the prevailing critical concept in Marcuse's philosophy. It appears   in the course of his criticism of fascism. The basis of the formation of   the dehistorization concept is Marcuse's criticism and interpretation of   Heidegger's conception of historicity during his "Heideggerian Marxism"   period (1928-1933). This Heideggerian conception is the ultimate   achievement of contemporary philosophy. The ultimate character of this   achievement is given to it, according to Marcuse, that it treats history   from the viewpoint of being in contrast to Hegel's idealistic dialectics   and German historicism of the 19th century, which interpreted it from   the viewpoint of consciousness or the spirit. There are four main   tendencies in Marcuse's criticism and transformation of Heidegger's   conception of historicity. 1. The deformalization of Heidegger's   treatment of historicity of Dasein. The explanation of the material   substance of historicity, i.e. the explanation of the material character   of conditions of human existence (Dasein) as the definitive feature of   historicity. 2. The concretization of Dasein, its treatment not as an   individual, but as a class in view of substantial differences of the   environment (Umwelt), material conditions of its existence. 3. Following   from both the deformalization of historicity and the concretization of   Dasein - the rehabilitation of the "being-with" (Mitsein) and the public   sphere (Mitwelt), and, thereby, of the space of political struggle as   the sphere of authenticity. 4. The disclosure of the fundamental role of   the phenomenologically considered spatiality (Raumlichkeit) in the   constitution of concrete historicity, i.e. historicity determined by the   material, social and political character of Dasein and the world.   Marcuse's interpretation and criticism of Heidegger's conception of   historicity and his criticism of dehistorization based on it paves the   way to his ontological interpretation of Marxist dialectics as the   method of the struggle against dehistorization and false totality and as   the only truly revolutionary way of thinking.
