AU Mikeshina, Lyudmila A.
TI Social Philosophy of Science: Unexpected Russian Roots
SO SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
AB Contemporary Russian philosophical traditions cannot be reduced to   Marxist works and research in religious philosophy. Russian philosophers   developed philosophy and methodology of social sciences and humanities   as early as at the end of the nineteenth century and in the beginning of   the twentieth century. In particular, S.N. Bulgakov's social philosophy   of science is closely related to European thinkers' works and ideas.   Problems of social determinism in scientific cognition are among them.   These problems are topical now as seen in the well-known discussion   about the nature and meaning of various forms of determinism (1990) in   which different stands are taken by R. Thomas, E. Morin and I.   Prigogine. A new level of research of social determinism is presented in   Russia in the second-half of the twentieth century. The identification   of determination with causality is overcome. Necessary and contingent   (probabilistic), dynamic and statistical determination,   self-determination, and so on, come under examination. In the 1970s   mechanistic and objectivistic determination is overcome and human   factors, such as the will and systems of values, are taken into account.   S.L. Frank turns to the methodology of social sciences in 1922 and   continues his studies in 1930 in Europe. Frank creates a holistic, fully   secular doctrine of social philosophy, sociology, philosophy of law and   history. The changing situation in Russia at the end of the twentieth   century and the beginning of the twenty first century allows us to   re-evaluate ideas and works of Russian thinkers who studied mainly   rationalist themes, including philosophy and methodology of science, its   hermeneutic and semiotic aspects. Russian and European philosophies are   used and essentially enriched. G.G. Shpet's ideas are examined. Studying   the sphere of language and meaning, recognizing the essential importance   of hermeneutics for knowledge in the humanities, he brings forward a   semiotic conception of ethnic psychology to precede, in particular,   American anthropologist and ethnographer C. Geertz's theory of culture.   Russian philosophers are quite aware that any reconstruction of real   cognition cannot limit itself to the transcendental epistemological   agent or consciousness in general. It is necessary to change the level   of abstraction of the subject matter of the non-classicalsocial,   cultural and historicalepistemology to draw closer to the real   manifestations of cognitive activity.
