AU Marchenko, Gennady, I
TI SCIENTIFIC SUBSTANTIATION OF GOVERNMENT DECISIONS IN CHINA: TRAINING &
SO VESTNIK TOMSKOGO GOSUDARSTVENNOGO
AB Researchers at the Chinese political party (CCP) believe that it is from   the moment of its occurrence was based on the tradition of close   cooperation with science. However, only the coming to power of President   Hu Jintao and Xi Jinping is not declarative, but almost literally led to   the invasion of science in the Party and the administration of the   country, including personnel policy and government decision-making. As a   result of this policy, a new Institute of Chinese policy, similar in   appearance to some training sessions, but in fact a crucial task, as the   intellectual development of senior management, and promotes the   transformation of the demands of society in specific solutions, and even   transfer them to the specific political program. In the so-called   collective training sessions, attended not only by members of the   Politburo, but the ministers and the governors of the provinces, and the   lecturers are the experts, scholars, researchers of Beijing University   and other regions. These sessions solve diverse goals and objectives -   the formation of a strategy to link the current problems with the   Chinese history and the experiences of other countries, making the   practice of collective decision-making contributes to the formation of a   unified approach (consensus) among the participants of political and   administrative process. Extremely interesting technology of their   conduct, which covers selection of topics and research institutions;   specific selection of lecturers and development of the texts, which are   then handed over to each of those present; regulations; a leading role;   The role of media. It is also important functions performed by the   sessions - information, symbolic; ideological and propaganda;   mobilization and recruitment policy; image production. Subjects   discussed questions is always concrete and linked with the test problems   of Chinese society. The party leadership and corruption in its ranks;   environment, employment and unemployment; development of culture and the   Internet; ideology and especially the central idea of "socialism with   Chinese characteristics"; "law supremacy"; Marxist philosophy, social   and economic sciences. And only a third of the sessions focused on   international affairs, but each of them is always designated the   national interests of China, its politics and society as a whole.   Analyze the experience is not only unique, but also instructive to   control the state, including Russia.
