AU Cheney, Thomas
TI HISTORICAL MATERIALISM AND ALTERNATIVE FOOD: ALIENATION, DIVISION OF
SO SOCIALIST STUDIES
AB This article takes food issues in both the advanced capitalist and   developing worlds, as well as discourses and struggles that have   developed in response to them, as a point of departure. The exposition   begins with a description of food sovereignty movements and their   successful struggles. Third-world campaigns for food security are   inspiring cases of resistance, of struggle for disalienation. The focus   then shifts to the problems with the contemporary North American diet,   and the 'foodie' response to the epidemic of poor eating and resulting   poor health. Foodie culture as it has developed in the advanced   capitalist world has severe limitations, particularly in regards to its   treatment of gender and class. Yet it also contains important messages   about meaningful human interaction with nature in the form of food   procurement and preparation. The analysis developed here strives to go   further than a critique of the distribution and availability of   foodstuffs in the contemporary capitalist economy. The aim is to   understand contestations over both the production and consumption of   food in terms of some key categories of Marxist philosophy. It is argued   that using the concepts of alienation, division of labour, and   production of consumption can strengthen the case for food sovereignty   while also mounting a critique of foodie culture that nonetheless   preserves its constructive insights. More specifically, this means that   an exploration of the relationship between the division of labour and   alienation can demonstrate the negative consequences of industrially   produced foods, while affirming the necessity of alternative forms of   food production and consumption. Everywhere and in different ways,   capitalism alienates humans from their species-being. This article   argues that this fact is particularly evident with regards to the   industrial food system. However, just as food can be a site of   oppression, so too can it be a locus of struggle against capital.
