AU Dmitrienko, Nadezhda M.
TI RUSSIAN MUSEOLOGY IN THE 1930S-2010S: AN EXPERIENCE OF A HISTORIOGRAPHY
SO TOMSK STATE UNIVERSITY JOURNAL
AB The study on the historiography of Russian museology, started in 2015,   needs to continue. Knowledge of the museum history makes it possible to   maintain that at the turn of the 1920-30-s the paradigm of museology   changed. Categories of the Marxist-Leninist philosophy - theory and   practice - were the basis for the new concept of museum science. It was   formulated at the First All-Russia Museum Congress. Very soon, the   theory was understood as instructions of the Central Committee of the   Communist Party and the Soviet Government. The concept of practice was   regarded as the implementation of those directives in museums. Museums   were stripped of academic significance and were turned into institutions   for political education. Rebirth of museology occurred in the post-World   War II period. The main event in this process was the extended session   of the Institute of Regional Studies and Museum Work, held in 1948. The   participants of the session returned the significance of an academic   discipline for museology. A.M. Razgon published an article in The Great   Soviet Encyclopedia in 1974. He wrote that museology was an academic   discipline which studied the origin of museums, their public functions,   and questions of theory and methods of museum science. Later, in 1988,   this definition was repeated in the book Muzeevedenie. Muzei   istoricheskogo profilya [Museology. Museums of A Historical Profile].   The authors called museology an academic discipline. At the same time,   they included independent academic disciplines ( museum theory, history   of museum science, museum source studies) in its structure. In fact,   they reflected on museology as on a complex of academic knowledge on   museum science, but did not recognize it. In the 1990s, the   socio-political development of the Russian society hanged. Consequently,   a new non-politicized concept of museology was required. Response to the   public demand was The Russian Museum Encyclopedia (Moscow, 2001. Vol.   1-2). The authors of the Encyclopedia summed up Russian museology,   identified gaps in museum knowledge. Their definition of museology, in   fact, was the same as in the 1980s. Museologists of today underestimate   the achievements of their predecessors. We can say there was no shift in   the museology paradigm. Nevertheless, there is a clear movement towards   a change of the paradigm. It is expressed in the intensive research of   the museum science history, in the attention to the experience of   pre-revolutionary museology, in the development of the historiography of   museum science. The widening and deepening of problems, the improvement   of museum study methodology identify new questions for discussion, and   their solution needs a new investigation.
